Title
Analyzing and prediciting crime in Los Angeles. A tool created to help police departments maximize their effectiveness and help fight crime before it begins.

Team
We are team Treeo. Our group consists of Madelyn Forster (mgforste), Ashley Rauch (ashrauch4) and Brealin Redecker (brealinredecker). The POC person will be ____.


Introduction
Our project will be about prediciting crime and the volatility of the crime. 
We are going to use our crime data to uncover patterns, predict hotspots, and improve public safety by analyzing historical incident data, location, and time. 

Our approach uses old methods of crime prediction such as hotspot analysis, geospatial mapping, and predictive policing to proactively deploy resources but we will add to this by 
identifying trends within a specific area and changes in behavior over time. Looking at if crime tendencies are the same now as they were in 2020. This is important when teaching
police officers how to go about the crimes. We think this will be successful because our dataset gives us all the possible variables, such as time and location, to implement our models. 

Who should care about this? In 2023, 22,830 people were killed via homocide. There are more on top of this due to those that get injured due to aggrevated crimes. 
This trend has improved over time and in 2025, crimes are decreasing per capita. But they are still happening and, unfortunately, are inevitable. To prepare for such events, cities have
to equip their policing departments with the proper information to handle the crimes more efficiently. Our analysis is designed to inform the cities the areas that are more prone to 
crimes to put a proper amount of officers and equipment there. This will hopefully better handle the crimes and save more lives along the way. 


Literature Review
Would you guys be able to do this? I kept the instructions in it. 
How is it done today, and what are the limits of current practice?
Here, you will review methods that have been attempted (use Google Scholar to find out), or cite literature to provide evidence that your method is novel. You should include citations to reviewed material. Use github's markdown syntax for footnotes1.

Also use this section to establish stakeholder needs. That is, for stakeholders that have specific but perhaps non-obvious needs (e.g., a city traffic planner will need to know about temporal variation in pedestrian traffic and the density of office buildings in order to determine the best placement of traffic signals). You should list each of your stakeholders here, explain why they are stakeholders, and the clarify needs. Recall from our lecture that I do not expect you to do your own stakeholder interviews, but I do expect you to do a little research online.

Data and Methods
Our data is from 'data.gov' and is a crime data set that gives crime information from 2020-present given by the Los Angeles Police Department. With this data, we plan to run some 
easy-to-understand models in order to help LAPD. We will use grid-based clustering by dividing LA into geographic cells and predicting crime density in each area. Once we have the 
'hotspot areas', we will add the time variable to this and use change point detection to pinpoint exact months/quarters when crime patterns changed significantly. Then, once we know
the answers (outputs) to our data, we will run a random forest to predict if an area will have high crime given time, location, day of week. If time permits, we also want to run a 
K-Means Clustering model to analyze trends over time and see how the crime clusters have changed from 2020 to 2025.

Data
Our data is from 'data.gov' and is Crime data from 2020-Present in Los Angeles. Here is a link to where to download our data, 'https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/crime-data-from-2020-to-present'. 
Our data has 28 columns, 1,004,991 rows with 13 string columns, 7 integer columns, and 8 float columns. 

The data is reliable because it is from a '.gov' website which means everything they post has to be accurate. According to the Freedom of Information Act, they are legally obligated 
to disclose information—including crime data and records of misconduct—under public records laws.

Our data does have meta data. It is in a json format within the link of the data. Some takeaways from the meta data, published by the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), it is
publically available data, and it was last updated on January 2, 2026.


Methods
This needs to be done. 
Describe your modeling approach. What sorts of transformations / preprocessing are going to be necessary? What sorts of modeling techniques will you apply? How are you going to evaluate your models (note that your evaluation should be consistent with stakeholder needs)?

Project Plan
2/2-2/16: EDA, data cleaning, initial summary graphs/descriptions
2/16-3/2: Initial analysis, first model and its effectiveness
3/2-3/16: Build off of the first model, explore its errors and areas for improvement. Begin to work on second model while improving on the first model.
3/16-3/30: Finish second model and have the first model established and ready to go.
3/30-4/13: Identify takeaways from our models and add anything we might think is necessary.
4/13-4/27: Finishing touches/making the project easily understandable.


Risks
This needs to be completed. 

This section will describe potential risks to the project. This should include both potential pitfalls and roadblocks, as well as any approaches to mitigation. What will you do if some aspect of your plan fails?

Grading
Does your proposal include all of the above mentioned sections? [1 point]
Have you clearly identifed your stakeholders and their needs [1 point]
Have you answered the 5 Heilmeier questions mentioned effectively [1 points]
Are your initial project management documents in place and do they follow the guidelines [1 point]
Is you proposal plan feasible, and do you have sufficient detail to give me confidence that you will succeed? [1 point]
Footnotes
